+++
title = "Categorical Limits and Colimits"
date = 2014-01-12T14:43:00Z
updated = 2014-09-08T15:06:47Z
tags = ["category theory", "math"]
markup = "mmark"
blogimport = true
math = true

+++

Many types of universal constructions that appear in a wide variety of mathematical contexts can be realized as categorical limits and colimits.  To define a limit we first need the notion of a cone of a diagram.   A diagram of type $$J$$ in a category $$\mathcal C$$ is a simply a functor $$F \colon J \to \mathcal C$$.   We imagine $$J$$ as an indexing for the objects and morphisms in $$\mathcal C$$ under consideration. When $$J$$ is a finite category it can be visualized as a directed graph.

A cone of $$F$$ is a pair $$(N, \Psi)$$ where $$N$$ is an object of $$\mathcal C$$ and $$\Psi$$ is a collection of $$\mathcal C$$-morphisms  $$\Psi_X \colon N \to F(X) $$ (one for each object $$X$$ in $$J$$)  such that $$\Psi_Y = F(f) \circ \Psi_X$$ for every $$J$$-morphism $$f \colon X \to Y$$.  Given two cones $$(N, \Psi)$$ and $$(M, \Phi)$$ we call a $$\mathcal C$$-morphism  $$u \colon N \to M$$ a cone morphism from $$(N, \Psi)$$ to $$(M, \Phi)$$ provided that $$u$$ respects the cone property, which is to say that for every object $$X$$ in $$J$$ the morphism $$\Psi_X$$ factors through $$u$$, i.e., $$\Psi_X = \Phi_X \circ u$$.  We will write $$u \colon (N, \Psi) \to (M, \Phi)$$ to denote that $$u$$ is a cone morphism.


<!--more-->

A limit cone of the diagram $$F$$ is a cone $$(L, \Phi)$$ of $$F$$ such that for every other cone $$(N, \Psi)$$ of $$F$$  there exists a unique cone morphism $$u \colon (N, \Psi) \to (L, \Phi)$$. In this sense a limit $$L$$ is a universal cone. A co-cone and colimit are the corresponding dual notions,  so in particular  a co-cone is a cone of a diagram of type $$J$$ in the opposite category $$\mathcal C^{op}$$.

One observation to make is that a limit of $$F$$ is unique up to canonical cone isomorphism.  For this reason we typically speak of *the* limit of $$F$$. What this means is that if $$(L, \Phi)$$ and $$(L', \Phi')$$ are limits of $$F$$, then there exists  a unique cone isomorphism between them.   To see this, first note that the identity morphism $$\text{id}_L \colon L \to L$$ is actually a cone morphism $$\text{id}_L \colon (L, \Phi) \to (L, \Phi)$$. By the uniqueness property of limits, this is the only such cone morphism.  Moreover, since $$L$$ and $$L'$$ are both limits,  there exist unique cone morphisms  $$u \colon (L', \Phi') \to (L, \Phi)$$  and $$u' \colon (L, \Phi) \to (L', \Phi')$$.  If we can show that $$u \circ u' \colon L \to L$$ and  $$u' \circ u \colon L' \to L'$$ are cone morphisms, then it must follow that $$u \circ u' = \text{id}_L$$ and $$u' \circ u = \text{id}_{L'}$$, which proves that $$u$$ is in fact a unique cone isomorphism.  To this end,  observe that for any object $$X$$ in $$J$$ it follows that $$\Phi'_X = \Phi_X \circ u$$ and  $$\Phi_X = \Phi'_X \circ u'$$, so  $$\Phi_X = \Phi'_X \circ u'= (\Phi_X \circ u) \circ u' = \Phi_X \circ (u \circ u')$$ and similarly $$\Phi'_X = \Phi'_X \circ (u' \circ u)$$.  So $$u \circ u'$$ and $$u' \circ u$$ are cone morphisms, as desired.

The product and co-product of objects in a category $$\mathcal C$$ are special cases of limits and co-limits.  When $$J$$ consists precisely of two distinct objects $$X$$ and $$Y$$ with no non-identity morphisms, and $$F \colon J \to \mathcal C$$ is a functor,  the product of $$F(X)$$ and $$F(Y)$$  is the limit $$(F(X) \times F(Y), \pi)$$ of  $$F$$ and the co-product of these two objects is the co-limit  $$(F(X) \amalg F(Y), \iota)$$.

For a specific example products and co-products  consider the category $$\mathcal C$$ of sets  and let $$J$$ be as above.  If $$F \colon J \to \mathcal C$$ is any diagram, we claim that the Cartesian product $$F(X) \times F(Y)$$ together with the projection maps is the limit of $$F$$.   To see this, first set $$A:=F(X)$$ and $$B:=F(Y)$$ and let $$\pi_A$$ and $$\pi_B$$ denote the respective projections from $$A \times B$$.  We must show that if $$N$$ is any other set with maps $$f \colon N \to A$$ and $$g \colon N \to B$$, then there exists a unique map $$u \colon N \to A \times B$$ such that $$f = \pi_A \circ u$$ and $$g = \pi_B \circ u$$.  First, the map $$f \times g \colon N \to A \times B$$ taking an element $$x \in N$$ to the tuple $$(f(x), g(x))$$ clearly satisfies $$\pi_A \circ (f \times g) = f$$ and $$\pi_B \circ (f \times g) = g$$, so $$f \times g$$ is a cone morphism.   Now suppose $$u \colon (N, \{ f, g \}) \to (A \times B, \pi)$$ is a cone morphism.   Then $$\pi_A \circ u = f$$ and $$\pi_B \circ u = g$$. If $$u(x)=(a,b)$$ for an element $$x \in N$$, then $$a = (\pi_A \circ u) (x)= f(x)$$ and $$b = (\pi_B \circ u) (x) = g(x)$$, so $$uh(x)= f \times g (x)$$.  This proves that $$u = f \times g$$, so $$f \times g$$ is the unique cone morphism from $$N$$ to $$A \times B$$.

Next we claim that the disjoint union $$A \amalg B$$ together with the injections $$\iota_A \colon A \to A \amalg B$$ and $$\iota_B \colon B \to A \amalg B$$ is the co-product of $$A$$ and $$B$$. To see this, we must show that if $$N$$ is any other set and there are maps $$f \colon A \to N$$ and $$g \colon B \to N$$, then $$f$$ factors uniquely through $$\iota_A$$ and $$g$$ factors uniquely through $$\iota_B$$. More specifically this means we must show there is a unique map $$u \colon A \amalg B \to N$$ such that $$f = u \circ \iota_A$$ and $$g = u \circ \iota_B$$.  Define a map $$f \amalg g \colon A \amalg B \to N$$ by $$(f \amalg g) (x) = f(x)$$ if $$x \in A$$ and $$(f \amalg g) (x) = g(x)$$ if $$x \in B$$. If $$u \colon (A \amalg B, \iota) \to (N, \{ f, g \} )$$ is a cone morphism, then $$f(a) = (u \circ \iota_A) (a)$$ for all $$a \in A$$ and $$g(b) = (u \circ \iota_B) (b)$$ for all $$b \in B$$.  So in particular, if $$a \in A$$ (viewed as a subset of $$A \amalg B$$)  we have $$u(a) = f(a) = (f \amalg g) (a)$$ and if $$b \in B$$ (viewed as a subset of $$A \amalg B$$) then $$u(b) = g(b) = (f \amalg g) (b)$$, so $$u = f \amalg g$$.  This proves that $$f \amalg g$$ is a unique cone morphism, as desired.
